Updating short tutorial (#4386)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/assembly/tutorials/vgp_workflow_training/tutorial.md

- gallardoalba
- pickettbd
- abueg

> - nekrut

Reviewer: If you like can use our fancy new contributions syntax to more accurately record contributions to a training material, declaring which people should be recorded for authorship or just editing.

```
contributions:
  authorship:
    - shiltemann
  editing:
    - bebatut
    - hexylena
  funding:
    - carpentries
  testing:
    - userX
  ux:
    - userY
  infrastructure:
    - userZ
```

see the [full gtn tutorial schema documentation](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/schemas/tutorial.html) for details on the individual roles.

# Getting started on Galaxy

This tutorial assumes you are comfortable getting data into Galaxy, running jobs, managing history, etc. If you are unfamiliar with Galaxy, we recommed you visit the [Galaxy Training Network](https://training.galaxyproject.org). Consider starting with the following trainings:
--------

This tutorial assumes you are comfortable getting data into Galaxy, running jobs, managing history, etc. If you are unfamiliar with Galaxy, we recommend you visit the [Galaxy Training Network](https://training.galaxyproject.org). Consider starting with the following trainings:
- [Introduction to Galaxy]({% link topics/introduction/tutorials/introduction/slides.html %})
- [Galaxy 101]({% link topics/introduction/tutorials/galaxy-intro-101/tutorial.md %})
- [Getting Data into Galaxy]({% link topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/get-data/slides.html %})
- [Using Dataset Collections]({% link topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/collections/tutorial.md %})

> - [Introduction to Galaxy Analyses](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/introduction)

Reviewer: you can keep this! it just needed to be `{% link topics/introduction/index.md %}`

> - [Downloading and Deleting Data in Galaxy]({% link topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/download-delete-data/tutorial.md %})

Reviewer: but these could all may be better expressed as tutorial pre-requisites?

> <comment-title>A note on data quality</comment-title>
> We suggest at least 30✕ PacBio HiFi coverage and 30✕ Hi-C coverage per haplotype (parental genome); and up to 60✕ coverage to accurately assemble highly repetitive regions. 
{: .comment}

# Getting the data

> -----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think a semantic rule is needed here, there's no content being separated from the header.

The following steps use PacBio {HiFi} and Illumina {Hi-C} data from baker's yeast ([*Saccharomyces cerevisiae*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saccharomyces_cerevisiae)). The tutorial represents trajectory **B** from Fig. 1 above. For this tutorial, the first step is to get the datasets from Zenodo. Specifically, we will be uploading two datasets:

1. A set of PacBio {HiFi} reads in `fasta` format
2. A set of Illumina {Hi-C} reads in `fastqsanger.gz` format

## Uploading `fasta` datasets from Zenodo

The following two steps demonstrate how to upload three PacBio {HiFi} datasets into you Galaxy history.

### **Step 1**: Copy the following URLs into clipboard
(you can do this by clicking on {% icon copy %} button in the right upper corner of the box below. It will appear if you mouse over the box.)

```
https://zenodo.org/record/6098306/files/HiFi_synthetic_50x_01.fasta
https://zenodo.org/record/6098306/files/HiFi_synthetic_50x_02.fasta
https://zenodo.org/record/6098306/files/HiFi_synthetic_50x_03.fasta
```

### **Step 2**: Upload datasets into Galaxy

These datasets are in `fasta` format. Upload by following the steps shown in the figure below.

------

> ![Figure 2: Uploading fasta files in Galaxy]({{site.baseurl}}/faqs/galaxy/images/upload_fasta_via_url.png "Here we upload three fasta files. Compressed (.gz or .bz2) datasets are uploaded in exactly the same fashion by selecting an appropriate datatype (fasta.gz or fasta.bz2)")

Reviewer: It looks like this alt-text doesn't describe the image very well for users who are relying on a screen reader to access the content. We have a short guide on [what's appropriate for alt-text vs captions in the GTN Contributing Guide](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#guidelines-on-alt-vs-figcaption-text) which has more details. *This comment may apply to more images, please consider checking all of them.*

------

## Uploading `fastqsanger.gz` datasets from Zenodo

Illumina {Hi-C} data is uploaded in essentially the same way as shown in the following two steps.

> <warning-title>DANGER: Make sure you choose correct format!</warning-title>
> When selecting datatype in "**Type (set all)**" drop-down, make sure you select `fastaqsanger` or `fastqsanger.gz` BUT NOT `fastqcssanger` or anything else!
{: .warning}

### **Step 1**: Copy the following URLs into clipboard
(you can do this by clicking on {% icon copy %} button in the right upper corner of the box below. It will appear if you mouse over the box.)

```
https://zenodo.org/record/5550653/files/SRR7126301_1.fastq.gz
https://zenodo.org/record/5550653/files/SRR7126301_2.fastq.gz

> ```

Reviewer: This seems like a hands-on step, should it be in a hands-on box to help learners recognise it's a step they need to execute and not just read about?

### **Step 2**: Upload datasets into Galaxy

These datasets are in `fastqsanger.gz` format. Upload by following the steps shown in the figure below.

> -----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

please remove these rules. If you'd like the styling to look differently or feel they have some purpose please let us know and we can discuss adding them to the site-wide CSS!

Author: why are you against these?

Reviewer: > The <hr> [HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML) element represents a thematic break between paragraph-level elements: for example, a change of scene in a story, or a shift of topic within a section.
> ([via mdn](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/hr))

there isn't a thematic break occurring here, you're just moving from text to a figure which was discussed before and after. Semantically they do not make sense, so I assume you must be using them for a visual purpose?

Reviewer 2: If there is a reason you need these, let us know, and perhaps we can update the template do do the same consistently in all tutorials (e.g. if it's because you wanted more whitespace around figures)

Author: yes, I wanted to separate figures better. Maybe we should have a figure box?

Reviewer 2: ok, I will play around with ways to delineate figures better (border? more whitespace? background color?) in a separate PR, so that it can be uniformly applied to all tutorials.

> ![Figure 3: Uploading Fasta files in Galaxy]({{site.baseurl}}/faqs/galaxy/images/upload_fastqsanger_via_url.png "Here we upload two fastqsanger.gz files. Uncompressed or bz2 compressed (.bz2) detests are uploaded in exactly the same fashion by selecting an appropriation datatype (fastqsanger or fastasanger.bz2)")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Figure 3: Uploading Fasta files in Galaxy]({% link faqs/galaxy/images/upload_fastqsanger_via_url.png %} "Here we upload two fastqsanger.gz files. Uncompressed or bz2 compressed (.bz2) detests are uploaded in exactly the same fashion by selecting an appropriation datatype (fastqsanger or fastasanger.bz2)")
```

{% snippet faqs/galaxy/collections_build_list.md %}

Once we have imported the datasets, the next step is to import the VGP workflows from the WorkflowHub.

# Importing workflows

> All analyses described in this tutorial are performed using *workflows*--chains of tools. Before we can proceed we need to import workflows into your Galaxy account. In order to do this you need to follow the instruction below.

Reviewer: I think there can be better ways to present this, but if "learning to use DS/WFH" is one of your learning objectives for users of this tutorial, then I guess we keep it as is.

E.g. we could be using the same method the GTN uses to link directly to a workflow and have it be 1-click-to-run like we do for workflows inside the GTN, but adapted for WFH/DS.

but we can leave this as-is for now, since that would require some more work

## Genome profile analysis (WF1)

[{% icon exchange %} Switch to step by step version]({% link topics/assembly/tutorials/vgp_genome_assembly/tutorial.md %}#genome-profile-analysis)

Now that our data and workflows are imported, we can run our first workflow. Before the assembly can be run, we need to collect metrics on the properties of the genome under consideration, such as the expected genome size according to our data. The present pipeline uses **Meryl** for generating the *k*-mer database and **Genomescope2** for determining genome characteristics based on a *k*-mer analysis.

### **Step 1**: Identify inputs

The profiling workflow takes the following inputs:

1. {HiFi} reads as a collection
2. *K*-mer length
3. Ploidy

### **Step 2**: Launch *k*-mer profiling workflow

1. Click in the **Workflow** menu, located in the top bar
2. Click in the {% icon workflow-run %} **Run workflow** buttom corresponding to `K-mer profiling and QC (WF1)`
3. In the **Workflow: VGP genome profile analysis** menu:
   - {% icon param-collection %} "*Collection of Pacbio Data*": `7: HiFi_collection`

>    - "*K-mer length*": `31`

Reviewer: This seems like another bit of content that should be in a hands-on box, like it previously was.

Author: Hands on boxes are very hard to edit and maintain - this is a much clearer way to represent this.

------

> <comment-title>K-mer length</comment-title>
> In this tutorial, we are using a *k*-mer length of 31. This can vary, but the VGP pipeline tends to use a *k*-mer length of 21, which tends to work well for most mammalian-size genomes. There is more discussion about *k*-mer length trade-offs in the extended VGP pipeline tutorial.
{: .comment}

### **Step 3**: Refill your coffee

Assembly is not exactly an instantaneous type of analysis - this workflow will take approx 15 minutes to complete.

### **Step 4**: Interpret the results

Once the workflow has finished, we can evaluate the linear plot generated by [**`Genomescope`**](https://github.com/schatzlab/`Genomescope`) (Fig. 7), which includes valuable information such as the observed *k*-mer profile, fitted models and estimated parameters. This file corresponds to the dataset `15` in this [history](https://usegalaxy.org/u/cartman/h/k-mer-profiling).

-----

> ![Figure 6: `Genomescope` plot](../../images/vgp_assembly/genomescope_plot.png "GenomeScope2 <i>k</i>-mer profile. The first peak located at about 25&times; corresponds to the heterozygous peak. The second peak at 50&times;, corresponds to the homozygous peak. The plot also includes information about the the inferred total genome length (len), genome unique length percent (uniq), overall heterozygosity rate (ab), mean <i>k</i>-mer coverage for heterozygous bases (kcov), read error rate (err), average rate of read duplications (dup) and <i>k</i>-mer size (k).")

Reviewer: Note here that your figure caption (useful for sighted and non-sighted users) is actually quite good. You alt-text could probably be changed to say this:

```suggestion
![figured described in caption](../../images/vgp_assembly/genomescope_plot.png "GenomeScope2 <i>k</i>-mer profile. The first peak located at about 25&times; corresponds to the heterozygous peak. The second peak at 50&times;, corresponds to the homozygous peak. The plot also includes information about the the inferred total genome length (len), genome unique length percent (uniq), overall heterozygosity rate (ab), mean <i>k</i>-mer coverage for heterozygous bases (kcov), read error rate (err), average rate of read duplications (dup) and <i>k</i>-mer size (k).")
```

we don't include figure numbers in alt-text since that's just noise for non-sighted users.

Author: is there a way to refer to a particular figure then (e.g., latex style)?

Reviewer 2: yes you can, it is described how to do it [in the contributing tutorial here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#adding-images-with-captions)

Reviewer 2: To clarify: figures are always automatically numbered, you can use that number to refer to the image, (or use the method in my link above to link to it). 

The "Figure 6" in this case was only the alt-text for the image, not a caption and thus not shown anywhere, except to people using screenreaders (in which case it's not that useful)
